---
layout: post
title: Turbulent Dynamos
description: Applied to the Sun, stars, galaxies and galaxy clusters
image:
type: Research
---

<p>My thesis work, under the supervision of Prof Kandaswamy Subramanian, is titled 
<strong><i>Magnetic fields in the universe: Understanding their origin and evolution.</i></strong>
Coherent magnetic fields are observed in stars, galaxies and galaxy clusters and influence important physical processes in these astrophysical systems.
The origin of cosmic magnetic fields is thought to be the result of turbulent dynamos which convert kinetic energy of the fluid to magnetic energy.</p>
<p>There are two kinds of turbulent dynamos.
	<ul>
		<li>Mean field (or large scale) dynamos : amplifies fields correlated on scales larger than the fluid stirring scale or the energy carrying scale</li>
		<li>Fluctuation (or small scale) dynamos : amplifies fields correlated on scales smaller than the fluid stirring scale.</li>
	</ul>
Mean field dynamos are required to explain the large scale component of magnetic fields in systems like stars, spiral galaxies and accretion discs. In particular, fluctuation dynamos
are generic, and operate with minimal requirements of the underlying fluid flow.
</p>
<p>In my thesis work, I investigated the turbulent dynamo theory and its applications both analytically and numerically.<br><br>
<span style="color:khaki">Key results from my thesis:</span>
<br>Extending Kazantsev's theory for small-scale dynamo (SSD) to include finite time correlation effect. 
We solved this extended equation to find a reduced growth rate for the SSD but one which intriguingly preserves the magnetic power spectrum of the Kazantsev form.
<br> <br>Using high resolution simulations, it was shown that SSD grown fields can help understand Faraday Rotation measures in galaxy clusters. This is because 
as the SSD saturates, the magnetic integral scale grows from resistive scale to 1/4-1/3 of the velocity out eddy scale.
<br><br>1024^3 simulations of helical dynamos at Pm=0.1 and Pm=10 show that a unified dynamo operates in kinematic regime. 
This dynamo saturates at small scales and then at progressively at larger scales. As the small scale fields become increasingly coherent on saturation, 
this averts the magnetic Reynolds number dependent quenching of the large-scale field. 
</p>
<p>
<i><strong style="color:khaki">512^3, Pm=1 small-scale dynamo</strong></i>
<br>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/L1ipplrC_rE?rel=0&controls=0&showinfo=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</p>
